.TH SPRAT-CLI 1 "May 2026" "sprat-cli" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
sprat-cli \- sprite atlas layout and packing pipeline
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B spratlayout
.I folder|file|-
[\fB\-\-profile\fR \fINAME\fR]
[\fB\-\-profiles\-config\fR \fIPATH\fR]
[\fB\-\-mode\fR compact|pot|fast|grid]
[\fB\-\-optimize\fR gpu|space]
[\fB\-\-max\-width\fR \fIN\fR]
[\fB\-\-max\-height\fR \fIN\fR]
[\fB\-\-padding\fR \fIN\fR]
[\fB\-\-extrude\fR \fIN\fR]
[\fB\-\-source\-resolution\fR \fIWxH\fR]
[\fB\-\-target\-resolution\fR \fIWxH\fR]
[\fB\-\-resolution\-reference\fR largest|smallest]
[\fB\-\-scale\fR \fIF\fR]
[\fB\-\-trim\-transparent\fR]
[\fB\-\-rotate\fR]
[\fB\-\-multipack\fR]
[\fB\-\-sort\fR name|none]
[\fB\-\-threads\fR \fIN\fR]
[\fB\-\-debug\fR]
.PP
.B spratpack
[\fB\-a\fR \fIPATTERN\fR]
[\fB\-\-atlas\-index\fR \fIN\fR]
[\fB\-\-extrude\fR \fIN\fR]
[\fB\-\-protect\fR]
[\fB\-\-zopfli\fR]
[\fB\-\-frame\-lines\fR]
[\fB\-\-line\-width\fR \fIN\fR]
[\fB\-\-line\-color\fR \fIR,G,B[,A]\fR]
[\fB\-\-threads\fR \fIN\fR]
[\fB\-\-debug\fR]
.PP
.B spratconvert
[\fB\-\-transform\fR \fINAME|PATH\fR]
[\fB\-\-atlas\fR \fIPATTERN\fR]
[\fB\-\-output\-dir\fR \fIPATH\fR]
[\fB\-\-list\-transforms\fR]
[\fB\-\-markers\fR \fIPATH\fR]
[\fB\-\-animations\fR \fIPATH\fR]
[\fB\-\-auto\-animations\fR]
.PP
.B spratframes
[\fB\-\-has\-rectangles\fR]
[\fB\-\-rectangle\-color\fR \fICOLOR\fR]
[\fB\-\-tolerance\fR \fIN\fR]
[\fB\-\-min\-size\fR \fIN\fR]
[\fB\-\-max\-sprites\fR \fIN\fR]
[\fB\-\-threads\fR \fIN\fR]
.I input_image
.PP
.B spratunpack
[\fIatlas.png\fR|\fB\-\fR]
[\fB\-\-frames\fR \fIPATH\fR]
[\fB\-\-output\fR \fIDIR\fR]
[\fB\-\-threads\fR \fIN\fR]
[\fB\-\-debug\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBsprat\-cli\fR is a UNIX pipeline for generating sprite sheets and transforming layout metadata.
.PP
\fBspratlayout\fR scans an image folder, list file, or TAR stream from stdin and writes a text layout to standard output.
.PP
\fBspratpack\fR reads the layout from standard input and writes one or more PNG atlases to standard output (or to files when \fB\-a\fR is used).
.PP
\fBspratconvert\fR reads the same layout format from standard input and transforms it into text formats (for example JSON, CSV, XML, CSS) using template-driven transforms, writing the result to standard output.
.PP
\fBspratframes\fR detects sprite rectangles in a sprite sheet and writes them to standard output in the spratframes format.
.PP
\fBspratunpack\fR extracts sprites from an atlas using a frames definition file.
Atlas input is a file path, \fB\-\fR for an explicit stdin read, or standard input when no atlas path is given.
If \fB\-\-output\fR is not specified, extracted sprites are written as a TAR stream to standard output.
.PP
Normal output is written to stdout. Errors are written to stderr.
.SH COMMANDS
.SS spratlayout
Reads image metadata and prints layout lines to stdout:
.PP
atlas \fIwidth,height\fR
.br
scale \fIfactor\fR
.br
sprite "\fIpath\fR" \fIx,y\fR \fIw,h\fR [\fIleft,top right,bottom\fR] [rotated] [dither] [colors=N]
.PP
If \fB\-\-trim\-transparent\fR is enabled, trim offsets are included per sprite.
.PP
If rotation is used for a sprite, the sprite line includes the \fBrotated\fR token.
.PP
Input modes:
.IP "\(bu" 2
\fBfolder\fR \(em scans all images in the directory.
.IP "\(bu" 2
\fBfile\fR \(em treated as a newline-delimited list of image paths when the argument points to a text file (comments starting with \fB#\fR and blank lines are ignored). Relative paths are resolved relative to the list file; each path must point to an existing image or the command fails.
.IP "\(bu" 2
\fB\-\fR \(em reads a TAR archive from standard input, extracts it to a temporary directory, and processes the contained images. Useful for piping the output of \fBspratunpack\fR (which writes a TAR stream) directly back into \fBspratlayout\fR.
.PP
Multipack:
.IP "\(bu" 2
If \fB\-\-multipack\fR is enabled, the tool will evaluate multi-atlas candidates and may emit multiple \fBatlas\fR sections. When max dimensions are set, candidates are constrained by those limits.
.PP
Profile configuration is loaded from the first existing file in this order:
.IP "\(bu" 2
\fB\-\-profiles\-config\fR path (when provided)
.IP "\(bu" 2
\fBspratprofiles.cfg\fR beside the executable (portable install)
.IP "\(bu" 2
\fB$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/sprat/spratprofiles.cfg\fR (Linux, default \fB~/.config/sprat/\fR),
\fB~/Library/Application Support/sprat/spratprofiles.cfg\fR (macOS), or
\fB%APPDATA%\\sprat\\spratprofiles.cfg\fR (Windows)
.IP "\(bu" 2
Global installed config (typically \fB/usr/local/share/sprat/spratprofiles.cfg\fR)
.PP
Profile values act as defaults; CLI options override them per run.
.PP
Performance cache:
.IP "\(bu" 2
Metadata and output caches are stored in the system temp directory.
.IP "\(bu" 2
Unchanged inputs/options reuse cached results.
.IP "\(bu" 2
Entries older than one hour are pruned automatically.
.SS spratpack
Reads layout text from stdin and writes one or more PNG streams.
.PP
Layout accepts:
.br
atlas \fIwidth,height\fR (multiple sections supported for multipack)
.br
scale \fIfactor\fR
.br
sprite lines in current or legacy numeric format
.br
current sprite lines may include \fBrotated\fR, \fBdither\fR, and \fBcolors=N\fR tokens.
.PP
Output:
.IP "\(bu" 2
By default, writes a single PNG to stdout.
.IP "\(bu" 2
If multiple atlases are produced and output is stdout, result is written as a TAR stream.
.IP "\(bu" 2
If \fB\-a\fR (or \fB\-\-atlas\fR) is used with a pattern like \fBatlas_%d.png\fR, multiple atlases are written to files.
.IP "\(bu" 2
If \fB\-\-atlas\-index\fR is used, only the specified atlas index is processed and written to stdout.
.SS spratconvert
Reads layout text from stdin and writes transformed text to stdout.
.PP
Unsuffixed placeholders are auto-encoded based on output type inferred from transform metadata (\fBmeta.extension\fR) or transform name/argument.
.PP
Transforms can be selected by name (for example \fBjson\fR, \fBcsv\fR, \fBxml\fR, \fBcss\fR) or by path to a custom \fB.transform\fR file.
Transform files are searched in the directory beside the executable, the user data directory, and the global install directory.
.PP
Optional \fB\-\-markers\fR and \fB\-\-animations\fR files can be loaded and referenced by transform placeholders.
.PP
If \fB\-\-auto\-animations\fR is enabled, frames are automatically grouped into animations based on common name prefixes and numeric suffixes.
.PP
Transform sections use explicit open/close tags (for example \fB[meta]\fR ... \fB[/meta]\fR) or the modern line-based DSL (for example \fBmeta\fR, \fBheader\fR, \fBsprites\fR, \fB- sprite\fR).
.PP
The core structure is defined by iteration blocks:
.IP "\(bu" 2
\fBSprites\fR: \fB[sprites]\fR containing \fB[sprite]\fR (or \fBsprites\fR containing \fB- sprite\fR).
.IP "\(bu" 2
\fBAnimations\fR: \fB[animations]\fR containing \fB[animation]\fR (or \fBanimations\fR containing \fB- animation\fR).
.IP "\(bu" 2
\fBMarkers\fR: \fB[markers]\fR containing \fB[marker]\fR (or \fBmarkers\fR containing \fB- marker\fR).
.PP
Templates support marker/animation conditional sections (\fB[if_markers]\fR, \fB[if_no_markers]\fR, \fB[if_animations]\fR, \fB[if_no_animations]\fR) and optional separator/header/footer sections.
.PP
A general conditional syntax \fB[if ATTR="VALUE"]...[/if]\fR (or \fB[if ATTR!="VALUE"]...[/if]\fR) is also supported. At the section level it maps \fBhas_markers\fR and \fBhas_animations\fR to the corresponding conditional blocks. Within section content it can test any current rendering variable (for example \fB[if marker_type="point"]...[/if]\fR).
.PP
Placeholders:
.IP "\(bu" 2
\fBSprite fields\fR: \fB{{name}}\fR (basename without extension), \fB{{path}}\fR, \fB{{x}}\fR, \fB{{y}}\fR, \fB{{w}}\fR, \fB{{h}}\fR.
.IP "\(bu" 2
\fBUnity Y-coordinate\fR: \fB{{unity_y}}\fR \(em Y-coordinate flipped for Unity's bottom-left origin (\fBatlas_height\fR - \fBy\fR - \fBh\fR).
.IP "\(bu" 2
\fBSource size\fR: \fB{{source_w}}\fR, \fB{{source_h}}\fR \(em original sprite dimensions before trimming (\fBw\fR + \fBtrim_left\fR + \fBtrim_right\fR, and \fBh\fR + \fBtrim_top\fR + \fBtrim_bottom\fR). Required by formats such as Phaser Atlas JSON and Unity TexturePacker JSON.
.IP "\(bu" 2
\fBTrim fields\fR: \fB{{trim_left}}\fR, \fB{{trim_top}}\fR, \fB{{trim_right}}\fR, \fB{{trim_bottom}}\fR (pixels removed from each edge), \fB{{src_x}}\fR/\fB{{src_y}}\fR (aliases for \fBtrim_left\fR/\fBtrim_top\fR), \fB{{has_trim}}\fR (\fBtrue\fR when any trim value is non-zero). Pre-computed plist helpers: \fB{{plist_frame}}\fR (\fB{x,y},{w,h}\fR), \fB{{plist_offset}}\fR (Cocos2d center offset), \fB{{plist_source_color_rect}}\fR (\fB{trim_left,trim_top},{w,h}\fR), \fB{{plist_source_size}}\fR (\fB{source_w,source_h}\fR). \fB{{rotated_plist}}\fR outputs \fB<true/>\fR or \fB<false/>\fR for use in XML/plist boolean elements. \fB{{plist_atlas_size}}\fR is a global field (\fB{atlas_width,atlas_height}\fR).
.IP "\(bu" 2
\fBPivot points\fR: \fB{{pivot_x}}\fR, \fB{{pivot_y}}\fR. These are resolved from markers named \fBpivot\fR of type \fBpoint\fR (either per-sprite or global). \fB{{pivot_x_norm}}\fR, \fB{{pivot_y_norm}}\fR provide normalized coordinates (0.0 to 1.0). \fB{{pivot_y_norm}}\fR is flipped for Unity's coordinate system (1.0 - py/source_h). \fB{{pivot_y_norm_raw}}\fR provides normalized Y without flipping.
.IP "\(bu" 2
\fBStable IDs\fR: \fB{{name_hash}}\fR, \fB{{name_hash_hex}}\fR \(em FNV-1a hash of the sprite name, useful for engine-specific internal IDs (such as Unity's spriteID).
.IP "\(bu" 2
\fBSprite rotation\fR: \fB{{rotated}}\fR (\fBtrue\fR when the sprite was packed rotated, else \fBfalse\fR).
.IP "\(bu" 2
\fBMarker fields\fR: \fB{{marker_name}}\fR, \fB{{marker_type}}\fR, \fB{{marker_sprite_index}}\fR, \fB{{marker_sprite_name}}\fR.
.IP "\(bu" 2
\fBAnimation fields\fR: \fB{{animation_name}}\fR, \fB{{animation_sprite_indexes_json}}\fR, \fB{{sprite_names}}\fR/\fB{{sprite_names_json}}\fR/\fB{{sprite_names_csv}}\fR (display names of frame sprites), \fB{{animation_from}}\fR/\fB{{animation_to}}\fR (first and last sprite index of the animation, useful for range-based formats such as Aseprite frameTags).
.IP "\(bu" 2
Typed placeholders (for example \fB{{name_json}}\fR, \fB{{marker_vertices_xml}}\fR) are explicit and recommended.
.PP
The built-in JSON transform produces a top-level \fBatlases\fR array (each entry has \fBwidth\fR, \fBheight\fR, \fBpath\fR) and a flat top-level \fBsprites\fR array. Sprite spatial data is grouped into nested objects: \fBrect\fR (\fBx\fR, \fBy\fR, \fBw\fR, \fBh\fR), \fBpivot\fR (\fBx\fR, \fBy\fR), and \fBtrim\fR (\fBleft\fR, \fBtop\fR, \fBright\fR, \fBbottom\fR). Index fields are omitted from \fBsprites[]\fR and \fBanimations[]\fR entries.
.PP
The \fBAseprite\fR transform produces an Aseprite JSON Array sprite sheet. When animations are present the \fBframeTags\fR array is populated using \fB{{animation_from}}\fR/\fB{{animation_to}}\fR sprite indices.
.PP
The \fBGodot\fR transform produces a JSON file suitable for runtime loading in Godot 4 via GDScript:
.PP
.nf
func make_sprite_frames(json_path: String) -> SpriteFrames:
    var data = JSON.parse_string(FileAccess.get_file_as_string(json_path))
    var atlas = load("res://" + data.image)
    var sf = SpriteFrames.new()
    sf.remove_animation("default")
    for anim in data.animations:
        sf.add_animation(anim.name)
        sf.set_animation_speed(anim.name, anim.speed)
        for i in range(anim.from, anim.to + 1):
            var f = data.frames[i]
            var tex = AtlasTexture.new()
            tex.atlas = atlas
            tex.region = Rect2(f.region.x, f.region.y, f.region.w, f.region.h)
            tex.margin = Rect2(f.margin.left, f.margin.top,
                               f.margin.right, f.margin.bottom)
            sf.add_frame(anim.name, tex)
    return sf
.fi
.PP
Each frame entry contains \fBregion\fR (atlas coordinates), \fBmargin\fR (trim offsets: left/top/right/bottom), \fBsource_size\fR, and \fBrotated\fR. Animation entries contain \fBfrom\fR/\fBto\fR frame indices, \fBspeed\fR (fps), and \fBloop: true\fR.
.PP
The \fBLibGDX\fR transform produces a LibGDX \fBTextureAtlas\fR \fB.atlas\fR file. The \fBoffset\fR field uses LibGDX's y-up convention: \fBoffset: {{trim_left}}, {{trim_bottom}}\fR. Animations are not encoded in the \fB.atlas\fR format; use sprite name suffixes (e.g. \fBwalk_0\fR, \fBwalk_1\fR) and \fBAnimation<TextureRegion>\fR in code instead.
.PP
The \fBplist\fR transform produces a Cocos2d-x TextureAtlas property list (format 2). Per-sprite values use Cocos2d's \fB{x,y}\fR and \fB{x,y},{w,h}\fR notation inside \fB<string>\fR elements. The \fBoffset\fR is the center offset of the trimmed region from the original sprite center (y-up): \fB{(trim_left\-trim_right)/2, (trim_bottom\-trim_top)/2}\fR. These values are available as \fB{{plist_frame}}\fR, \fB{{plist_offset}}\fR, \fB{{plist_source_color_rect}}\fR, \fB{{plist_source_size}}\fR, and \fB{{plist_atlas_size}}\fR when writing custom transforms targeting this format.
.SS spratframes
Scans \fIinput_image\fR and detects sprite boundaries by finding non-transparent connected components or by detecting rectangles of a specific color.
Prints layout-compatible lines to stdout:
.PP
path \fIinput_image\fR
.br
[background \fIr,g,b\fR]
.br
sprite \fIx,y\fR \fIw,h\fR
.SS spratunpack
Extracts individual sprites from an \fIatlas.png\fR using a frames definition (\fB.json\fR or \fB.spratframes\fR).
.PP
Atlas input:
.IP "\(bu" 2
A file path reads the atlas from disk. If \fB\-\-frames\fR is not specified, it looks for \fB<atlas>.json\fR or \fB<atlas>.spratframes\fR alongside the atlas.
.IP "\(bu" 2
\fB\-\fR or omitting the atlas argument reads the atlas PNG from standard input. \fB\-\-frames\fR is required in this case.
.PP
Output:
.IP "\(bu" 2
If \fB\-\-output\fR is specified, extracted sprites are written as individual PNG files to that directory.
.IP "\(bu" 2
If \fB\-\-output\fR is omitted, sprites are written as a TAR stream to standard output, which can be piped to \fBspratlayout \-\fR for further processing.
.PP
Supports de-obfuscation of protected atlases (starting with "SPRAT!" signature).
.SH OPTIONS
.SS spratlayout
.TP
\fB\-\-profile\fR \fINAME\fR
Profile name loaded from profile config. Default: \fBfast\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-profiles\-config\fR \fIPATH\fR
Use an explicit profile configuration file.
.TP
\fB\-\-mode\fR compact|pot|fast|grid
Override packing mode from selected profile.
\fBgrid\fR places every sprite in a uniform cell (sized to the largest frame) arranged left-to-right, top-to-bottom, so any frame can be addressed by column and row index.
.TP
\fB\-\-optimize\fR gpu|space
Override optimization target from selected profile.
.TP
\fB\-\-max\-width\fR \fIN\fR
Maximum atlas width. Overrides profile value.
.TP
\fB\-\-max\-height\fR \fIN\fR
Maximum atlas height. Overrides profile value.
.TP
\fB\-\-no\-max\-width\fR
Disable width limit even if selected profile defines one.
.TP
\fB\-\-no\-max\-height\fR
Disable height limit even if selected profile defines one.
.TP
\fB\-\-padding\fR \fIN\fR
Extra pixels between packed sprites. Overrides profile value.
.TP
\fB\-\-extrude\fR \fIN\fR
Repeat edge pixels N times (padding should be >= extrude * 2).
.TP
\fB\-\-source\-resolution\fR \fIWxH\fR
Source design resolution baseline (for example \fB800x600\fR). Must be used together with \fB\-\-target\-resolution\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-target\-resolution\fR \fIWxH\fR
Target output resolution (for example \fB800x600\fR). Must be used together with \fB\-\-source\-resolution\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-resolution\-reference\fR largest|smallest
Choose which axis ratio drives source/target resolution scaling. Default: \fBlargest\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-scale\fR \fIF\fR
Pre-scale factor applied before source/target resolution mapping. Valid range: \fB0 < F <= 1\fR. Overrides profile value.
.TP
\fB\-\-trim\-transparent\fR
Enable transparent-border trimming (overrides profile value).
.TP
\fB\-\-rotate\fR
Enable 90-degree sprite rotation during packing (overrides profile value).
.TP
\fB\-\-multipack\fR
Split into multiple atlases if they don't fit in the specified max dimensions.
.TP
\fB\-\-sort\fR name|none
Order of sprites in layout. \fBname\fR sorts by filename using natural ordering and enforces that order in the output regardless of packing optimizations. \fBnone\fR allows the packer to reorder sprites for better packing efficiency. Default: \fBnone\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-threads\fR \fIN\fR
Number of worker threads used during compact-mode packing (\fB\-\-preset quality\fR or \fB\-\-preset small\fR).
Has no effect when using \fBfast\fR or \fBpot\fR presets.
Defaults to the number of logical CPU cores reported by the OS.
Set to \fB1\fR to force single-threaded packing, which is useful for reproducible benchmarks or when memory is constrained.
.TP
\fB\-\-debug\fR
Enable detailed error reporting and debug visualization.
.PP
Config keys available per profile section:
.IP "\(bu" 2
\fBmode=compact|pot|fast|grid\fR
.IP "\(bu" 2
\fBoptimize=gpu|space\fR
.IP "\(bu" 2
\fBmax_width\fR, \fBmax_height\fR
.IP "\(bu" 2
\fBpadding\fR
.IP "\(bu" 2
\fBscale\fR (\fB0 < scale <= 1\fR), \fBtrim_transparent\fR, \fBthreads\fR, \fBmultipack\fR
.SS spratpack
.TP
\fB\-a\fR, \fB\-\-atlas\fR \fIPATTERN\fR
Output filename pattern (e.g. \fBatlas_%d.png\fR). Required for multipack layouts when not writing to stdout.
.TP
\fB\-\-atlas\-index\fR \fIN\fR
Process only the specified atlas index from the layout.
.TP
\fB\-\-extrude\fR \fIN\fR
Repeat edge pixels N times (overrides layout value).
.TP
\fB\-\-protect\fR
Protect output PNG with basic XOR-based obfuscation.
.TP
\fB\-\-zopfli\fR
Optimize output PNG using Zopfli (very slow, requires build-time support).
.TP
\fB\-\-frame\-lines\fR
Draw rectangle outlines for each sprite.
.TP
\fB\-\-line\-width\fR \fIN\fR
Outline thickness in pixels. Default: \fB1\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-line\-color\fR \fIR,G,B[,A]\fR
Outline color channels (0-255). Default: \fB255,0,0,255\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-threads\fR \fIN\fR
Worker thread count for sprite decode/blit. Default: auto.
.TP
\fB\-\-debug\fR
Enable detailed error reporting and debug visualization.
.SS spratconvert
.TP
\fB\-\-transform\fR \fINAME|PATH\fR
Transform name or path to a custom transform file. Default: \fBjson\fR.
.TP
\fB\-a\fR, \fB\-\-atlas\fR \fIPATTERN\fR
Atlas path pattern used by \fB{{atlas_path}}\fR/\fB{{atlas_*}}\fR placeholders. Example: \fBatlas_%d.png\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-output\-dir\fR \fIPATH\fR
Write transform output to \fIPATH/{variant}{extension}\fR instead of stdout.
When \fB\-\-transform\fR is a plain name without a dot (for example \fBphaser\fR), \fBspratconvert\fR scans the transforms directory for files named \fBphaser.*.transform\fR and renders each one, using the part after the dot as the variant (for example \fBhash\fR becomes \fIPATH/hash.json\fR).
When a single named or path transform is given, the output stem is derived from the transform filename (for example \fBphaser.hash.transform\fR writes \fIPATH/hash.json\fR).
The placeholder \fB{{output_stem}}\fR is available inside transform templates and resolves to the variant name.
.TP
\fB\-\-list\-transforms\fR
Print available transforms and exit.
.TP
\fB\-\-markers\fR \fIPATH\fR
Load external markers plaintext file using the \fBpath\fR and \fB- marker\fR DSL.
An optional \fBroot\fR directive sets a base directory; relative \fBpath\fR values are resolved against it.
Supported marker types: \fBpoint\fR (\fBx,y\fR), \fBcircle\fR (\fBx,y radius\fR), \fBrectangle\fR (\fBx,y w,h\fR), \fBpolygon\fR (\fBx,y x,y ...\fR).
.TP
\fB\-\-animations\fR \fIPATH\fR
Load external animations plaintext file using the \fBanimation\fR and \fB- frame\fR DSL.
An optional \fBroot\fR directive sets a base directory; relative quoted frame paths are resolved against it.
.PP
An animation can be declared as an alias of another animation using the \fBalias\fR keyword:
.PP
animation \fI"name"\fR alias \fI"source"\fR [\fBh-flip\fR] [\fBv-flip\fR]
.PP
Alias declarations carry no frame list; instead they reference another animation by name and attach optional rendering hints.
\fBh-flip\fR and \fBv-flip\fR are independent and order-insensitive.
The source name is stored as metadata; validation is the runtime's responsibility.
In the output, alias entries carry an \fBalias\fR field in place of \fBfps\fR and \fBsprite_indexes\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-auto\-animations\fR
Automatically group frames into animations by name pattern.
.SS spratframes
.TP
\fB\-\-has\-rectangles\fR
Instead of transparency-based detection, look for closed rectangles of a specific color.
.TP
\fB\-\-rectangle\-color\fR \fICOLOR\fR
Color of rectangle borders to detect. Formats: #RRGGBB, #RGB, RGB(r,g,b), r,g,b. Default: \fB255,0,255\fR (magenta).
.TP
\fB\-\-tolerance\fR \fIN\fR
Distance tolerance in pixels for grouping non-transparent pixels into sprites. Default: \fB1\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-min\-size\fR \fIN\fR
Minimum width/height for a detected sprite to be included. Default: \fB4\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-max\-sprites\fR \fIN\fR
Limit the maximum number of sprites to detect. Default: \fB10000\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-threads\fR \fIN\fR
Number of worker threads. Default: auto.
.SS spratunpack
.TP
\fB\-f\fR, \fB\-\-frames\fR \fIPATH\fR
Path to frames definition file (\fB.json\fR or \fB.spratframes\fR).
.TP
\fB\-o\fR, \fB\-\-output\fR \fIDIR\fR
Directory where extracted sprites will be saved. If omitted, sprites are written as a TAR stream to stdout.
.TP
\fB\-j\fR, \fB\-\-threads\fR \fIN\fR
Number of worker threads for sprite extraction. Default: auto.
.TP
\fB\-\-debug\fR
Enable detailed error reporting.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Generate a layout from a folder:
.B spratlayout ./frames > layout.txt
.TP
Generate a layout from a list file:
.B spratlayout frames.txt > layout.txt
.TP
Exclude files from sync/watch regeneration:
.B printf 'exclude "enemy.png"\n' > frames/.spratlayoutignore
.TP
Pack a PNG atlas from a layout file:
.B spratpack < layout.txt > spritesheet.png
.TP
Full pipeline (layout and pack in one step):
.B spratlayout ./frames | spratpack > spritesheet.png
.TP
Multipack to multiple files:
.B spratlayout ./frames --multipack --max-width 1024 --max-height 1024 | spratpack -a atlas_%d.png
.TP
Convert layout to JSON:
.B spratconvert --transform json < layout.txt > layout.json
.TP
Convert layout to JSON with auto-animations:
.B spratconvert --transform json --auto-animations < layout.txt > layout.json
.TP
Convert layout with markers and animations:
.B spratconvert --transform json --markers markers.txt --animations animations.txt < layout.txt > layout.json
.TP
Convert with a custom transform template:
.B spratconvert --transform ./my.transform < layout.txt > layout.custom.txt
.TP
Full pipeline including conversion:
.B spratlayout ./frames | tee layout.txt | spratconvert --transform json > layout.json && spratpack < layout.txt > spritesheet.png
.TP
Pack and convert in parallel from the same layout:
.B spratlayout ./frames > layout.txt && spratpack < layout.txt > spritesheet.png && spratconvert < layout.txt > layout.json
.TP
Protect output atlas:
.B spratpack --protect < layout.txt > protected.png
.TP
Unpack an atlas to a directory:
.B spratunpack atlas.png --frames atlas.json --output ./extracted
.TP
Unpack atlas to TAR stream (stdout):
.B spratunpack atlas.png > sprites.tar
.TP
Unpack atlas from stdin to TAR stream:
.B cat atlas.png | spratunpack --frames atlas.json > sprites.tar
.TP
Re-pack an unpacked atlas (round-trip via TAR stdin):
.B spratunpack atlas.png | spratlayout - | spratpack > repacked.png
.TP
Pack frames from a TAR archive:
.B tar cf - ./frames | spratlayout - | spratpack > spritesheet.png
.TP
Debug frame bounds:
.B spratpack --frame-lines --line-width 2 --line-color 0,255,0 < layout.txt > spritesheet_lines.png
.TP
Detect sprites in a sheet:
.B spratframes sheet.png > frames.spratframes
.SH EXIT STATUS
All commands return:
.TP
\fB0\fR
Success.
.TP
\fB1\fR
Invalid arguments, invalid input data, image decode/encode failure, or packing failure.
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBspratlayout\fR(1), \fBspratpack\fR(1), \fBspratconvert\fR(1), \fBspratframes\fR(1), \fBspratunpack\fR(1)
